###Readme - Steelhead Runs

#### Overview

The file “Steelhead Runs.kml” defines a Google Earth overlay.  That is, a collection of balloon-shaped icons that float at fixed geographical locations over the landscape image shown by Google Earth.  The icons locate rivers in California and Oregon that support steelhead runs.  As you adjust your viewpoint with the mouse or the GE control symbols, the icons move along with the earth image.  The color, size, and decoration of an icon gives information about the run timing and magnitude.  Clicking on an icon opens a description pane with more specific information and useful links, including river flow and weather forecast.  Double clicking on an icon flies you to a close-up of the icon location and also  opens the description pane.  Click anywhere off the pane to make it disappear.

#### Showing the overlay in Google Earth

To  see the overlay, launch Google Earth, go to the “File” menu, and select “Open”.  (If your computer doesn’t already have the GE application, free downloads are widely available on the net.  For example, you can get the newest version for Mac [here](https://google-earth.en.uptodown.com/mac/download). Install following the included instructions.)  Navigate to your downloaded copy of “Steelhead Runs.kml” and click the “Open” button.  An item labeled “Steelhead Runs.kml”  will appear under “Temporary Places” in the “Places” section of the lefthand sidebar, and the whole set of steelhead icons should appear on the earth image pane that  fills most of the screen.  If you don’t see the icons, click on the checkbox just to the left of the “Steelhead Runs.kml” item in the sidebar.  A checkmark will appear in the box, and, at the same time, the icons will appear on the image pane.

Alternatively, if your machine has a copy of Google Earth, even if it is not running, if you double click on your copy of the Steelhead Runs.kml file, Google Earth should launch and it should open the file for you.

Finally, if you want your copy of Steelhead Runs.kml to open automatically each time you launch GE, simply drag the “Steelhead Runs.kml” label out of the “Temporary Places”  folder and into the “My Places” folder located higher up in the “Places” section of the sidebar.  Another way to accomplish the same thing, is to simply quit GE.  You will be asked if you want to save your temporary places, and you should say yes.  GE will then move “Steelhead Runs.kml” into “My Places” for you.

#### Detailed description from the information pane

California and Oregon Steelhead Runs - Rich Miller - April 16, 2018

This collection of Google Earth overlays provides a depiction of the timing and magnitude of the principal steelhead runs of these two states, and reflects three primary sources of data: passage or fish trap counts, steelhead report card summaries, and guide consensus. The first type is reliable and quite complete, the second much less so, but is available for far more locations, and the third will almost certainly be relatively accurate in timing, but probably overstated in magnitude. In recent years, especially in Oregon, continuous video recording of fish passing windows in fish ladders, followed by human viewing and counting yields essentially perfect data. In contrast, angler reporting is frequently inaccurate and often very incomplete. In a 2007 report to the California Legislature, the DFW estimated that although reporting was mandatory, only about 1/3 of the anglers who had report cards returned them. In Oregon, return of the report card is optional. Thus, you should assume that the angler catch data in the overlays is a severe under-representation of the true count of the fish caught. However, it still may quite accurately give relative monthly activity. In particular, although reported counts certainly reflect the number of anglers who choose to fish at a given time and place, their choice to do so is prejudiced by local, historical knowledge, which means counts go up when there are a lot of fish to be caught, and down when there are few.

In the overlays, average monthly run timing and magnitude are encoded by the coloring, size, and decoration of the balloon icons. Twelve colors in spectral order (purple, blue, green, yellow, orange, red) correspond to the months of the year (January to December) when activity was maximal. Larger balloons reflect greater activity. Balloon decorations are stars, diamonds, circles, squares, or none. Starred icons denote locations of fish passage or hatchery entrapment counts, diamonds denote places where the principle catch was winter steelhead (fish sexually mature when they left the ocean), circles, where it was summer steelhead, and squares where there were significant winter and summer catches. Balloons with no decoration have a special meaning. They represent locations without count data, but are noted because the fishing regulations change there. When it seems reasonable, their colors are inferred from nearby locations; otherwise they are colored gray.

If you single click on a balloon, it opens up to a text window. If you double click, Google Earth flies you to a close-up of the location, and there opens the text window. For passage or entrapment locations, you see a line of the form "Steelhead: 5 7 47 / 121 399 988 / 940 157 80 / 151 54 _". The numbers are the average counts for the months January through December. The groups of three divided by the slashes are therefore the seasons Winter, Spring, Summer, and Fall. An underscore means either zero, or no data. These locations also have a text line indicating the location and elevation, and, if the river does not empty directly into the ocean, the total distance by water to the ocean.

For catch report locations, the text gives the average monthly catch, coded as above, separately for winter and summer steelhead if the data supports that separation. These locations also give location information, and usually provide underlined links (blue or purple). If you click on a link, the web page opens (a bit slowly), replacing the Google Earth display. To get back, click the "Back to Google Earth" button at the top left of the screen. These locations also contain text at the top giving the open season for steelhead, and at the bottom, giving additional regulations relevant to anadromous salmonids.

Regulation change locations give just the open season and the additional regulations, as well as location data.




